.\" pkgmk(8) manual page
.\" See COPYING and COPYRIGHT files for corresponding information.
.Dd January 8, 2025
.Dt PKGMK 8
.Os
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkgmk
.Nd make an installable software package
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm pkgmk
.Op Ar option ...
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility makes an installable software package to be used as input to
the
.Xr pkgadd 8
command.
The package itself is an archive of files, and its contents have a
directory structure format.
.Pp
To prepare to use
.Nm ,
you must write a file named
.Pa Pkgfile ,
that describes how the package should be build.
See
.Xr Pkgfile 5
for more information how-to write
.Pa Pkgfile Ns Pq s .
Once a suitable
.Pa Pkgfile
exists, each time you change some source files, you simple execute
.Nm
to bring the package up to date.
The
.Nm
program uses
.Pa Pkgfile
file and the last-modification times of the source files to decide if
the package needs to be updated.
Global configuration file is stored in
.Pa /etc/pkgmk.conf .
This file is read by
.Nm
at startup.
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl d , Fl \-download
Download missing source files.
.It Fl do , Fl \-download-only
Do not build, only download missing source files.
.It Fl utd , Fl \-up-to-date
Do not build, only check if the package is up to date.
.It Fl uf , Fl \-update-footprint
Update footprint and treat last build as successful.
.It Fl if , Fl \-ignore-footprint
Build package without checking footprint.
.It Fl in , Fl \-ignore-new
Build package, ignore new files in a footprint mismatch.
.It Fl um , Fl \-update-md5sum
Update md5sum using the current source files.
.It Fl im , Fl \-ignore-md5sum
Build package without checking md5sum first.
.It Fl cm , Fl \-check-md5sum
Check md5sum without building the package.
.It Fl ns , Fl \-no-strip
Do not strip executable binaries and/or libraries.
.It Fl f , Fl \-force
Build package even if it appears to be up to date.
.It Fl c , Fl \-clean
Remove the (previously built) package and the downloaded source files.
.It Fl kw , Fl \-keep-work
Keep temporary working directory.
.It Fl cf Ar conffile , Fl \-config-file Ns = Ns Ar conffile
Specify an alternate configuration file instead of the default
.Pa /etc/pkgmk.conf .
.It Fl af Ar format , Fl \-archive\-format Ns = Ns Ar format
Use the specified format for the created archive instead of the
default
.Dq gnutar
or the one defined in the configuration file as
.Dq PKGMK_ARCHIVE_FORMAT .
.Pp
The following archive formats are supported:
.Bl -column "XXXXXX"
.It Sy Format Ta Sy Description
.It gnutar Ta
GNU tar format
.It pax Ta
POSIX 1003.1-2001 (pax) format
.It ustar Ta
POSIX 1003.1-1988 (ustar) format
.It v7 Ta
Old V7 tar format
.El
.Pp
See
.Xr libarchive-formats 5
for more information about currently-supported formats.
.It Fl v , Fl \-version
Print version and exit.
.It Fl h , Fl \-help
Print help and exit.
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa Pkgfile
Package build description.
See
.Xr Pkgfile 5
for more information.
.It Pa .nostrip
Exceptions for
.Xr strip 1
executable binaries and/or libraries.
.It Pa .footprint
Package footprint (used for regression testing).
.It Pa .md5sum
MD5 checksum of source files.
.It Pa /etc/pkgmk.conf
Global package make configuration.
See
.Xr pkgmk.conf 5
for more information.
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width 2n -compact
.It 0
Success.
.It 1
General error.
.It 2
Invalid Pkgfile (missing variables/functions).
.It 3
Directory missing or permission error (source/build directories).
.It 4
Error during source file download.
.It 5
Error during source file unpacking.
.It 6
MD5 checksum verification failed.
.It 7
Package footprint check failure.
.It 8
Error during package 'build()' function execution.
.El
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr Pkgfile 5 ,
.Xr pkgmk.conf 5
.\" ==================================================================
.Sh AUTHORS
Originally written by
.An Per Lidén Aq Mt per@fukt.bth.se
as part of
.Dq Sy pkgutils
package for
.Lk http://crux.nu "CRUX" .
.Pp
This implementation was extensively re-worked for Zeppe-Lin by
.An Alexandr Savca Aq Mt alexandr.savca89@gmail.com .
.\" vim: cc=72 tw=70
.\" End of file.
