=pod

=encoding UTF-8

=head1 pkgmk - make software package

pkgmk is a package management utility that makes a software package.
This directory contains pkgmk, a package management utility, which
makes a software package.

This pkgmk distribution is a fork of CRUX' pkgmk utility (which is
part of CRUX' pkgutils software) as of commit 9ca0da6 (Sat Nov 17
2018).  It was rewritten in POSIX L<sh(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/sh>
with L<suckless' sbase|https://git.suckless.org/sbase/> compatibility.
Added support of L<aria2c(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/aria2c>
downloader.  The man pages have been rewritten in POD
(Plain Old Documentation).  Added new man page
L<Pkgfile(5)|https://zeppe-lin.github.io>.  Added bash completion.
Options C<-i>, C<-u>, C<-r> have been removed.  The support of
L<signify(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/signify> was removed too, since
L<pkgsrc collection|https://github.com/zeppe-lin/pkgsrc> is distributed
through L<git(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/git> with signed commits.

The original sources can be downloaded from:

=over

=item I<git>

  git clone git://crux.nu/tools/pkgutils.git
  git checkout 9ca0da6

=item I<web>

  https://crux.nu/gitweb/?p=tools/pkgutils.git;a=summary

=back

=head2 Dependencies

=head3 Build time

=over

=item *

L<make(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/make>,
L<sh(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/sh>,
and standard POSIX utilities like
L<sed(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/sed>,
L<mkdir(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/mkdir>,
L<cp(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/cp>,
L<cd(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/cd>,
L<rm(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/rm>,
L<chmod(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/chmod>

=item *

L<pod2man(1pm)|https://www.mankier.com/1/pod2man> from perl
distribution

=back

=head3 Runtime

=over

=item *

L<sh(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/sh>,
L<awk(1p)|https://www.mankier.com/1p/awk>,
and standard POSIX utilities

=item *

sbase or coreutils

=item *

diffutils

=item *

findutils

=item *

L<bsdtar(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/bsdtar>

=item *

L<curl(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/curl> OR
L<wget(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/wget> OR
L<aria2c(1)|https://www.mankier.com/1/aria2c> for downloading sources

=back

=head3 Tests

Tests require B<Build time> dependencies and the following:

=over

=item * L<podchecker(1pm)|https://www.mankier.com/1/podchecker>

Check POD for errors.

=item * L<httpx(1)|https://github.com/projectdiscovery/httpx>

Check for broken URLs.

=back

=head2 Install

The shell commands C<make; make install> should build and install this
package.  See F<Makefile> for configuration parameters.

The shell commands C<make; make check> should build and start some
tests.  See F<Makefile> for more information.

=head2 License and Copyright

pkgmk is licensed through the GNU General Public License v2 or later
<https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.
Read the COPYING file for copying conditions.
Read the COPYRIGHT file for copyright notices.

=cut

# vim:sw=2:ts=2:sts=2:et:cc=72:tw=70
# End of file.
